Table.
It's Jessie Miller.
Yeah. I haven't got nothing.
All right, thank you. Look, I don't even have to apologize
for being late. We're right on time.
So normally the case. So look, welcome.
I don't think we've been here before.
So Craig O'Connor, chair.
Craig Fleming, deputy chair. Faa Garcia, National MP for
New Lynn.
Kia ora, I'm Celia Wade-Brown, Green Party list MP.
All right. Now, take your
submission as read, but obviously speak and hopefully leave
time for questions. Thank you.
Thank you. Kia ora, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to our petition.
I'm Annalee Scoren, senior legal and policy advisor at Consumer New Zealand, and
this is my colleague Jessica Walker, who is our communications and campaigns
manager.
So imagine this. You've booked last-minute flights to Auckland
for a loved one's funeral. You get up at 4:30 a.m.
so you can get to the airport by 6:00 a.m. for a 7:00 a.m.
flight
with Air New Zealand. Upon arrival at the airport, you find out your flight has
been delayed until 11:00 a.m. due to operational issues.
You have no idea what that means, but now you're panicking that you won't make the
funeral because you've been told there are no seats available until the 11:00 a.m.
flight. In this situation, because the flight was
delayed due to reasons within the airline's control, you actually have rights,
but you're not clearly told your rights.
So in desperation, you log into Jetstar's website and fork out an
extra $500 for a one-way ticket on the 9:00 a.m. flight to Auckland.
And that's not a hypothetical. This is happening every day across New
Zealand.
What many passengers don't know is they have legal
protections under the Civil Aviation Act, Civil Aviation Act, sorry,
and the Consumer Guarantees Acts.
But the law is so complex, so unclear, and
so poorly communicated that most people don't even realize
those rights exist, let alone how to go about enforcing them.
And when people don't know their rights, those rights might not as well
exist.
Compare that to Europe. Under EU law, airlines are required to
proactively inform passengers of their rights when flights are disrupted,
not hidden in fine print, not buried on a website.
Clearly, directly, at the moment it matters most.
And that simple requirement changes everything.
Passengers in Europe know when they're entitled to refunds, food,
accommodation, and even financial compensation.
Airlines are held accountable, and the system works.
Not perfectly, but far better than the system we have here.
So why not in New Zealand?
Instead, here's what we're seeing.
Mass cancellations due to issues within the airline's control,
including the recent fuel crisis, and airlines banking on people
not knowing their rights. Passengers being told that they've been rebooked on
another flight, but not being advised of their other rights.
Passengers being told incorrectly that they're not entitled to
anything. Passengers forking out for hotels and meals that they
should've been reimbursed for, but aren't.
Passengers being told to claim under their insurance that they may not have
purchased, and even if they did, may not cover them anyway.
And passengers simply giving up because the process is too confusing,
too exhausting, and too stacked against them.
This isn't speculation. It's happening right now.
We at Consumer New Zealand continue to hear from travelers who've been misled,
ignored, or brushed aside, and the pattern is clear.
Jetstar was recently fined $2.25 million for
misleading passengers about their rights.
And Air New Zealand is currently being investigated by the Commerce Commission for
similar conduct. This isn't just about inconvenience,
it's about fairness, it's about transparency, and it's about
power.
Because right now, there's a power imbalance.
Airlines understand the system. They have legal teams, policies, and
processes. Passengers, they have a delayed flight, a
phone with 10% battery power, and a vague sense that something isn't
right when they're left out of pocket.
That imbalance allows accountability to slip.
And behind every complaint is a real human story.
A family that's stranded overnight with young children who has to pay hundreds of
dollars for last-minute accommodation that they really can't afford.
A student who ends up missing a crucial exam, or a traveler who is not
able to make that final goodbye with a loved one.
These aren't just disruptions, these are moments that really matter,
and in those moments, people deserve clarity, not
confusion.
So what's the solution?
It's actually simple. Under Section 14 of the Civil Aviation
Act, regulations can be made to require airlines to clearly
inform passengers of their rights at the point of disruption,
just like in Europe. A clear message at the airport, on your
phone, at the gate. For example, you can choose a refund,
a new flight, or a credit. Make your selection here.
You can also lodge a claim for additional costs you reasonably incur because of
the delay by clicking this link. Not hidden, not optional,
not after hours of searching and attempting to understand complex laws.
And this isn't about punishing the airlines.
It's about setting a fair standard.
We require transparency in other industries.
For example, in banking, in insurance, and with our utilities.
We don't know why air travel should be any different.
This change wouldn't require rewriting the law.
It doesn't mean copying Europe's compensation model.
It simply means ensuring that whatever rights do exist in New Zealand are
actually communicated to the people they're meant to protect
In the coming weeks, Consumer New Zealand will launch a flight rights portal
to help educate people about their flight rights and allow passengers to
lodge a complaint when things go wrong.
We'll feed these complaints back to the airlines and possibly the Commerce
Commission as well.
But it shouldn't be up to a small not-for-profit to fill that information gap.
We want the airlines to have to communicate rights to passengers,
because a right that isn't properly communicated just isn't a right in
practice. It's a technicality, and we believe that New
Zealanders deserve better than that.
So we urge the committee to take steps to fix this problem.
Let's give passengers the information they need when they need it most.
Let's restore balance and let's restore trust and make sure no
one is left in the dark or out of pocket for costs that are by
law meant to fall on the airlines.
Thank you, and we're happy to take questions.
All right. Thank you. One question.
And it makes no difference the type of ticket you purchased
to these-
No
... your rights, whether you're on a
non-refundable or a fully flexible-
Under the law, no
Under the law, it makes no difference at all.
Correct. Yeah.
Okay.
One question was first,
if you are catching an Air New Zealand flight in London,
they presumably have to comply with this already.
Yes.
Yeah.
That's right.
So they must have some systems-
Yes
... where it could easily... Yeah.
Exactly. So the airlines are already complying with these obligations in other
jurisdictions. Our national airline is already having to comply with these.
Australia?
Australia is about to introduce new sets of rules, so they're in a bit of a
transition phase at the moment. So we're watching closely to see what's going to
come out there.
Where do you see the solution of this lying?
We see the solution in being regulations under the
Civil Aviation Act. So already there is the power to introduce
these regulations. They just haven't been introduced.
So the regulations would require that airlines clearly
disclose passengers' rights when there is a disruption.
So the regulation-making power is there. It just needs to be acted upon.
Under the?
Civil Aviation Act.
Yeah, Section 410.
Agenda.
All right.
So literally, they're made by minister of instruction.
Correct.
Is it in the regs then? So there's an order in council.
Yes.
Okay.
Yeah. So it's a relatively simple-
Yeah.
Mm.
... thing that needs to be done, just so that passengers can be aware of what
rights exist, because at the moment, they're not.
Nine out of 10 passengers are not aware of their rights.
We're a little bit insulated from this.
Yes.
We have our office that looks after-
Yes, exactly.
Yeah.
What's the body that
represents the airlines in New Zealand?
The, um-
Civil Aviation Authority?
No.
Is that what you mean?
No. Their
group.
Ministry of Transport?
No, no, no. The group, their advocacy group.
Well, I think Body of the Airlines.
Yes. I'm not sure.
I don't know. No.
Yeah. Okay. We'll get them, and to-
Yes
... talk with them and see about that. So look, thank you very much.
Yeah, nice and clear.
It's very clear.
Thanks a lot.
Yeah.
Thank you.
And
there's, yes, I think that could be some good work here for the-
Mm
... Justice Committee.
Excellent.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for your time.
That was... Surely, everything was as clear cut as this one.
Yeah.
Cheers.
Mr. Chair, would like me to bring the next veteran to the- At what
time are they due?
Now.
Now. Yeah, you can bring them up.
3:24, yeah, it looks.
That could be Bishop, or it could be Meg.
It's James. I've spoken with him, and yeah,
as you'll see from the, the
email from his commission, they are about two months away
from reporting.
Good afternoon.
Struggling with it.
Ms. Wall.
Hi.
Wonderful to have you back in the building, if
not in person.
So now, so we're ready to go. So I think you should
know most of the committee here.
Yes. I have-
Just hold on. We've just got some of your
upcoming... Right. We're ready to go.
So you know me, of course, Louisa.
Kia ora, Louisa. I'm Greg. Louisa, I'm Paulo.
We've met before.
Kia ora.
Kia ora. Louise Cecilia.
Oh, tena tatou katoa. Kia ora, Mr. Chair.
It's lovely to see you.
All right. 10 minutes, Louisa, and hopefully leave some time for questions.
Wonderful. Thank you. So I initially
want to
acknowledge my collaborator on this petition, Sam Green, and
the 5,187 New Zealanders
who supported it through ActionStation.
Reflecting a shared concern about the standards that apply to
ministerial communication in our democracy.
I'd like to take this opportunity to acknowledge MP Marama Davidson for
tabling and presenting this petition to the House, and
just noting, the submission by Rachel Hayward, the
Secretary of the Cabinet.
So the purpose of the petition.
So this petition asks the House to consider whether the Cabinet
Manual provides sufficiently explicit guidance in relation
to misinformation and disinformation in ministerial
public communication. In particular, it asks whether
the existing expectations set out in the Cabinet Manual should be
clarified so that it is explicitly
understood how they apply in a modern
communication environment where information is rapidly
disseminated, amplified, and often stripped of
context. So this petition is not about
restricting political expression, but it is about
ensuring clarity and integrity in how existing
constitutional expectations are understood and
applied in ministerial communication.
The Cabinet Manual at paragraph 2.56 sets out
a clear and deliberately high standard for ministerial
conduct. It provides that ministers are expected
to act lawfully, uphold and be seen to
uphold the highest ethical and behavioral standards, and
exercise good judgment in all communication, both public
and private.
It also establishes that ministers are accountable to the Prime
Minister for their conduct. These are not general
principles of political behavior.
They are constitutional expectations that define
how ministerial authority is to be exercised in a
system that depends on public confidence.
Importantly, the standard is not limited to legality or
intent. It explicitly extends to judgment,
ethics, and the perception of integrity in all
communications. That reflects a core
constitutional reality. Ministerial
communication carries institutional authority and
therefore carries a higher threshold of responsibility
than ordinary political speech.
The issue we are raising is not that the Cabinet manual lacks
standards. It clearly sets out a strong ethical
framework. Rather, the issue is that it does not
explicitly articulate how those standards apply in
relation to misinformation and disinformation in
contemporary public communication.
Paragraph 2.56 requires ministers to
exercise good judgment in all communications
and uphold the highest ethical standards.
However, it does not clearly set out how that obligation
applies where information is inaccurate,
misleading, or amplified rapidly through digital
platforms.
This creates a gap between a strong constitutional principle and
its explicit application in today's communication
environment. In practice, this means the expectation
of good judgment is well established, but
its application to modern patterns of information
spread is not consistently or explicitly
articulated. The result is not a lack of principle, but
a lack of explicit guidance on how that principle should
operate in practice in the digital
era. The Cabinet manual is ultimately grounded in
one central principle: public confidence in
ministerial conduct. In a modern communications
environment, ministerial statements can be rapidly disseminated
across digital platforms, often reaching large audiences
before any clarification or correction is possible.
In that context, the accuracy and responsibility of ministerial
communication is not just desirable, it is essential
to maintaining public trust. When inaccurate or misleading
information is communicated from positions of executive authority,
even where unintended, the effect is not limited to immediate
debate. It can shape public understanding, influence
discourse, and affect confidence in institutions over
time. This is not about limiting disagreement or
political contest. Those are essential features of
democracy. However, where communication comes from
those holding ministerial office, it carries institutional
weight, and with that weight comes a corresponding obligation of care,
accuracy, and judgment.
This petition therefore asks whether consideration should be given to
clarifying the Cabinet manual so that paragraph
2.56 is more explicitly understood in
relation to contemporary communication realities.
Specifically, that it be made clear that the
obligation to exercise good judgment includes
responsibility for accuracy in public
communication. Ethical standards extend to preventing
the dissemination or amplification of misinformation and
disinformation.
And ministerial accountability applies to the full range of
modern communication platforms, including digital and
social media. Importantly, this does not
propose new restrictions on speech.
It does not change the principle of political debate or disagreement.
Rather, it seeks to clarify and strengthen the application of an
existing constitutional standard so that it remains
effective in a changed communication environment.
So in closing, this petition reflects a concern about the clarity and
resilience of one of the key constitutional documents guiding executive
conduct in New Zealand, the Cabinet manual.
Paragraph 2.56 already sets a strong expectation
that ministers must uphold the highest ethical standards and
exercise good judgment in all communications, both public and
private. This petition asks whether, in the current
environment, it is now necessary to make explicit what
is already implicit within that standard, that ministerial
responsibility includes ensuring that public
communications are accurate, responsible, and consistent
with the ethical expectations of public office.
Because where ministers hold institutional authority,
clarity of standard is not optional.
It is fundamental to maintaining both the integrity of the Cabinet manual
and the public trust on which it depends. So, Mr.
Chair, I'm happy to take questions
All right. Thank you. Okay.
And we'll be hearing from the Cabinet Office shortly.
So in doing that,
do you see then a need to strengthen the sanctions regime
around it?
Or whatever you do to this,
whatever alterations you might make,
without sanctions, that it becomes meaningless
anyway.
Well, the sanctions to this actually is an acknowledgement by the Prime
Minister in this case, that what that particular minister has
disseminated, and that was amplified across the
public
media and over the social media
forums,
was in fact disinformation or misinformation.
And that there should've been some
response
to the fact that in the public domain was
the, and I'll call it,
it was a form of
stigma and discrimination against two women
athletes who were competing at the Olympics.
Okay. The point I make, though, is that without stronger
sanctions...
It's not the sanctions, it's the clarity.
As I said,
it's the clarity of
and the judgment that the Prime Minister has to make in this instance
because they are the arbiter of how the Cabinet Manual
is operationalized. It's
a clear
decision when ministers put in the
public domain fact that then it was
clearly transpired that it wasn't fact.
That is, both of these athletes are biological
women. Both those athletes were
competing in an international competition sanctioned by the
Olympic Committee as biological women.
All right. Okay, look. Thanks. And members, so any other
questions?
No, that was really, really clear.
I'm just eager to hear the response from the Cabinet Office, yeah.
All right, just I invite the
Cabinet Office to the table. Thank you.
Sorry, I should've-
Thank you, Mr. Chair
... had you up there beforehand.
You got our introductions. So look, thank you-
Sure. Kia ora
... and
Lewis, you're welcome to remain on
while we hear from-
Thank you
... the Cabinet Office. Thank you.
Kia ora koutou. I'm Rachel Hayward, I'm Secretary of the Cabinet, and with me I've
got Hannah Jews, who's an advisor in our team.
I wondered if it's helpful to the committee if I could talk perhaps a
little bit about where the Cabinet Manual gets its authority from and how we go
about updating it.
That would be excellent.
Is that useful?
We're here. We're information junkies.
Absorbing. Okay, great.
Yeah, absorbing. We really want to know the facts.
As you know, the Cabinet Manual is the authoritative guide to central government
decision-making in New Zealand. It derives its authority
from its adoption by Cabinet on the publication of
every new edition and at the beginning of each new administration.
And we would also say that its authority also comes from
the fact that successive administrations have adopted it or endorsed it
as the basis on which they will operate. It's Cabinets Manual.
It used to be called the Cabinet Office Manual back in the day, and at some point,
the name changed. So we'll often also say it is Cabinets
Manual. So at the beginning of each new administration, the first cabinet
meeting
of a new government, one of their first actions is to endorse the Cabinet Manual as
the basis on which they'll operate.
Obviously, there's some matters in the Cabinet Manual that reflect legislation.
So there are parts like chapter eight, which talks about the Official Information
Act or the Privacy Act or the Public Records Act.
And those aspects of the manual have legislative force as well.
But generally, the Cabinet Manual provides guidance rather than prescribing rules.
And generally, it contains settled understandings of government practice and
processes. And that, I think, is one of its strengths.
It sets out the basis on which successive governments have chosen to operate,
and we don't flip-flop backwards and forwards between with a government
saying, "I don't like that bit, so we're not going to adopt it." So the other way
we tend to describe it is that it tends to follow rather than
lead change. So when we do an update,
and I'll come to how we go about doing those, we're often looking across what
other settled understandings are there elsewhere that we should now pull into the
manual.
So yeah, that's not to say the content's set in stone-
Okay
... but the change tends to be incremental.
Okay.
In terms of how the Cabinet Manual is updated, so it was first published in 1979.
The most recent edition is the seventh, and that was published in
2023.
So I've been in the Cabinet Office through two updates,
2017 and 2023.
We undertake a review of the manual every few years,
and the review is intended to reflect changes in procedure,
cabinet procedure, legislation,
administrative and constitutional arrangements, and cabinet decisions.
There are other mechanisms for circulating and
promulgating changes to the way a cabinet does things between
updates of the manual. So for example, a cabinet circular might go around saying,
"This is the position that cabinet wants you to take on Crown
Legal matters," or those circulars will go around, and at each
update, we will look through all the circulars and say, "Is there anything that we
should be pulling into the manual?"
So the way we do an update is we start by seeking the agreement of the Prime
Minister of the day to initiate a review.
We set up an interagency group,
and we'll have a steering group that'll involve agencies like Crown Law, the
central agencies, Treasury, PSC.
There'll be a ministerial reference group
We keep a bit of a running note of things that we think would be worth
reviewing in future editions of the manual, and we'll put out a
notice to all government departments, ministers, relevant agencies,
inviting them to provide comments on the guidance in the manual and to make
suggestions for changes that they think might be necessary.
And then we work through that process of updating and
finessing and checking with the ministerial reference group before we'll
come up with a revised draft.
And the revised final draft of that content goes to Cabinet, and it is
agreed by Cabinet. So,
that's the
kind of process. So Ms. Walls has talked about the material.
The question that the committee asked us was whether we thought there was
already
material in the Cabinet manual similar to that being requested.
And we would point to the same provisions that
the requirement for ministers and parliamentary under secretaries to conduct
themselves in a manner appropriate to the office, so 2.53 of the manual,
and that 2.56.
Just to restate that, so in all their roles, so whichever
capacity they're operating in, whether it's as an MP or a minister,
and at all times, ministers are expected to act lawfully and behave in a way that
upholds and is seen to uphold the highest ethical and behavioral standards.
This includes exercising a professional approach and good judgment in their
interactions with the public, staff, and officials, and in all their
communications, personal and professional.
The scope of that section is deliberately broad.
It reflects that Cabinet manual focus on principles and the fact that it
provides guidance rather than prescribing rules.
So,
I think that, and in all their communications, personal and professional, is the
bit that we looked at and thought, well, if we were looking for somewhere that we'd
say a response to mis- or disinformation
could sit somewhere, that's where we would see this sort of thing
falling.
Is that helpful?
Yeah. So there's no statutory basis? No.
So it's-
No, there'll be things in the manual that are statutory rules, but there's no
statutory basis.
Oh. So, hence-
It's adopted by Cabinet.
Yeah. So hence no sanctions regime.
No.
All right.
No. And the accountability of ministers is to the Prime Minister for their
behavior. So, yeah.
Has there been, in your histories, any
ministers who have been essentially
sacked? Well, I suppose of course there have been, for breaching the Cabinet
manual.
But for statements like the ones
from
which this petition has arisen.
I'd have to come back to you on that, Mr. O'Connor.
My instinctive answer is no, but I would want to go back and check.
So if I can come back to you with a response on that.
Certainly,
there's a range of things
that a Prime Minister can do, say, in terms of ministerial behavior and one
option, obviously, is to sack a minister if their conduct falls below the
standard that the Prime Minister thinks is acceptable.
Sorry.
I know it's a difficult one for you, but
with MMP, as MMP has evolved,
and we've seen the evolution of MMP more in this
particular government-
Mm-hmm
... is the Cabinet manual fit for purpose?
I know this is probably a very hard question, and feel free to-
Yeah.
I think it is. I think its strength, as I say, is that it
contains those settled understandings,
and that it does operate at a level of principle and guidance.
I think
that is actually one of its advantages.
There's absolutely a place for
granularity. I
think there's also a place for that kind of a broad principle, and there'll always
be,
in anything, as you know, in this place and in the Constitution, there's always an
element of political reality that
operates. But I think that the manual still contains
those settled understandings. It is the authoritative source, and it's the place
people look to, to say, "This is the standard of conduct we expect."
All right. Thank you. I'm sure to-
You're keeping me.
Go for it.
Oh, I thought we wouldn't need a Cabinet manual. I was just polite or whatever.
I guess the question for me would be, not having been nor
likely to be in a Cabinet,
what happens,
and again, certainly don't want specific examples,
certainly don't want to know which parliament this may have happened in.
But if
something is raised with the Prime Minister about what one of the ministers has
said,
are there instances where at least there's been a
rebuke or there's been something
raised? This doesn't, as our petitioner said, doesn't
actually mention
misinformation.
You could lump it in with highest ethical and behavioral standards,
but
have there been instances where you would know that
that has been raised with this particular minister?
I immediately can't think of one off the top of my head, Ms.
Boyd, but there have certainly been times when a Prime
Minister has said,
"That statement, or the way in which that minister spoke, doesn't accord.
I'm disappointed in what they've said." Or, "That falls below the standards I
expect of a minister." That sort of public rebuke.
Mm.
Or they've lost their ministerial-
Mm
... role. That's the bit that on the basis of just something
somebody said, I can't answer that off the top of my head, but I'm happy to come
back. But there's a range of
the
falling short in terms of a behavioral standard.
It's not a sack them or not. There are a range of things that
are-
Sure. Sure.
Yeah.
I think we all recognize that. And I
don't want to get into the details of specifics because I wasn't
there, but we've certainly seen it seems that the behavioral
standard was breached by one of the ministers within
the Prime Minister's own party. But I think the question is-
All right
... is it applied across to the others, which is your question about does it
work with our members?
Craig, you had
a-
Yeah, I'm just interested, going back in terms of the process of which this is
made.
It needs to be signed off by Cabinet.
I'm just imagining if this
change was recommended,
how that would get through the current Cabinet.
I
think
what would happen was it would end up coming back to us to include for
consideration in the next review.
So-
So beyond this term of Parliament?
I don't know. We
haven't got a review on the books for the next-
Okay. All right. No, it's just otherwise I was just imagining,
speaking frankly, if this current Parliament was to include this
change, it would essentially be making a critique of itself,
because otherwise why would there be the need to make this change?
So, yeah.
Oh, they might not trust what was coming next.
It's always going to be that any change to the manual is being adopted by Cabinet
to apply to Cabinet.
Yes.
So just remind me again. So each new
government-
Every new government, the first Cabinet meeting that they hold-
Well, they will-
They will endorse the Cabinet manual in terms of-
Usually the previous one, and then-
The existing one. So-
The existing one.
So this-
Yeah
... this 2023 Cabinet manual was published while Mr. Hipkins was Prime Minister.
All right.
And it was endorsed by the current administration when he came in.
And there's no review on at the moment?
Not at the moment, no.
All right. Look, well, thank you very much.
Thank you.
It's much appreciated. Quite clear. And thank you, Louisa.
This Petitions Committee is a great place for learning a
little about a lot.
That's good. It's our favorite thing to talk about in struggle, so.
Yeah, no, thank you very much. We certainly leave this room heck of a lot
better informed from both Samantha and yourselves than when we came in.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Thanks a lot.
Thank you.
And all hoping we get the opportunity to sign it off at some stage.
Some of us it may never, but others, I don't know.
Thanks.